[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>EDWARD GROUP: Fatigue, weight
gain, depression, constipation,
these are just a few of
the more common symptoms
of the dysfunction
of the thyroid,
a little gland that
exerts enormous influence
over the entire body.
Dr. David Brownstein is one
of the foremost practitioners
of holistic medicine
and has been
studying the true causes
of thyroid dysfunction
for over two decades.
His revolutionary
treatment plan with the use
of iodine supplementation
at its core
has saved thousands
of lives to date.
This is the second
in a four-part series
with Dr. Brownstein.
Thank you for being
here, Dr. Brownstein.
>>DAVID BROWNSTEIN:
Thank you for having me.
>>EDWARD: Can you
explain to our viewers
exactly how the thyroid
gland functions?
>>BROWNSTEIN: The
thyroid gland sits
in the lower part
of the neck, and it
weighs about 1 and 1/2 ounces.
And it produces about a
teaspoon of thyroid hormone
for a whole year.
So that teaspoon
of thyroid hormone
has to drive the metabolic
rate of every cell in the body,
because every cell in the
body needs and requires
adequate amounts of thyroid
hormone to function optimally.
So little variations
in that teaspoon
can have big
effects on the body.
As you mentioned in
the intro, problems
with an underproduction
of thyroid hormone
can be seen as weight gain,
fatigue, hair loss, dry skin.
Heart disease is associated with
it, and many other symptoms.
It all starts in the brain,
where the pituitary gland
produces a hormone called TSH.
TSH is Thyroid
Stimulating Hormone.
And it comes from
the brain and comes
to the thyroid
gland and stimulates
the thyroid gland to
produce thyroid hormone.
So from the thyroid
gland, it releases
T4, which is
Thyroglobulin molecule
with 4 atoms of iodine attached
to it into the bloodstream.
T4 gets circulated into the
bloodstream, hits the organs
and goes into the
cells of every cell
in the body, where it's
converted into T3, which has
3 iodine atoms attached to it.
And T3 is what
binds to the thyroid
receptors inside the cells
and exerts the thyroid hormone
effect that we want.
So one of the effects when
T3 binds to the cells is it
increases the metabolic
rate, so it produces heat.
So people who don't
have enough thyroid
hormone, one of their complaints
is they're cold all the time.
Well, they're cold
because they don't
have enough T3 producing
an increased metabolic rate
and producing heat.
So the system works pretty well.
We were designed well to have
adequate thyroid function
if the body has
an adequate source
of iodine and other nutrients
to help the thyroid work better.
>>EDWARD: So how common is it
these days to see individuals
with thyroid disorders?
>>BROWNSTEIN: How common is it?
It's really common.
I think it's the most
common reason people go
to their primary care doctor.
And the biggest complaint
I hear from my patients
is they're fatigued.
And one of the
thyroid effects when
it binds to those receptors
is it produces enough energy
to keep us from being fatigued.
So fatigue should
be a first signal
that perhaps the thyroid
is not working correctly.
>>EDWARD: What are the different
types of thyroid disorders
that are out there right now?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, I
mean, the most common one
is hypothyroidism, or
an underactive thyroid.
That's where people are
producing underactive amounts
of T4 and T3.
And they exhibit the
signs of hypothyroidism.
They're tired,
they're cold, they're
gaining weight, hair loss.
They can become a
little swollen, fluid
under their skin.
On the other side of the coin
is hyperthyroidism, where they
produce too much T4 and T3.
These people are nervous,
jittery, they're losing weight.
They can get palpitations.
And then there's the
autoimmune thyroid diseases.
Hashimoto's disease and Graves'
disease lead the way with that.
Those conditions can be
either hyper or hypo,
in the case of
Hashimoto's disease.
>>EDWARD: So I'm assuming
that some of those
can lead to thyroid cancer.
Would it be the same
symptoms that someone
would be suffering from
with any of those conditions
as it would be if someone was
suffering from thyroid cancer?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
thyroid cancer
is the fastest-growing cancer
in the United States right now,
so it's affecting
a lot of people.
And the main reason we're seeing
such a rapid rise of thyroid
cancer is the lack of iodine.
And the iodine is
an essential item
for every cell in the body.
We can't live without it.
But it's really essential
for thyroid gland function.
We can't make thyroid
hormone without iodine.
Now iodine also concentrates in
the other glands of the body.
That includes the thyroid, the
ovaries, the uterus, pituitary,
pancreas, and prostate gland.
And we can't make any
hormone without iodine.
But if we're going to focus
on the thyroid, recall
that I said to you, T4 has four
atoms of iodine attached to it.
T3 has three atoms of iodine
attached to the thyroglobulin
molecule.
We can't make those
T4 and T3 molecules
without adequate amounts of
iodine in the thyroid gland.
My research has clearly shown
that iodine levels have fallen
over the last 40 to 50 years.
In fact, they've fallen over
50% across the United States.
That's why we're seeing such an
epidemic of thyroid problems.
>>EDWARD: The medical
profession uses
the term "chronic
illnesses" all the time.
I just-- [CHUCKLES]
it's bizarre to me,
because I don't think you should
ever have a chronic illness.
That's just an illness
for life, basically.
And I know you've talked about
how important the thyroid is,
and how all of these other
illnesses, especially heart
disease and many other
illnesses have a link
to iodine deficiency, or even
have a link to the thyroid,
especially heart disease.
Can you expand on thyroid
and heart disease and maybe
some other chronic illnesses?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Sure.
So the relationship between
low thyroid and heart disease
was written about
in the late 1800s.
So that's been known
for over 100 years.
Now in medical school, we're not
given much information on that.
It's touched on a little
bit, but really, the cause
of heart disease that
medical students learn
is high cholesterol levels,
which I have written about.
And I don't think
that's the cause of it.
That's a symptom of it,
because if the thyroid is
underfunctioning, one of
the things that happens
is there's a lot of
inflammation in the body.
And the body
produces cholesterol
as an anti-inflammatory agent.
So in the case of
hypothyroidism,
cholesterol will go up.
And it can go up significantly.
Now the treatment for that
case of high cholesterol
isn't to give them a statin
drug or a cholesterol-lowering
medication, because you're just
treating the symptom, which
is high cholesterol.
It's treat the hypothyroidism,
and then the cholesterol
will naturally come down.
>>EDWARD: The autoimmune,
Graves' and Hashimoto's, can
you let the viewers know the
difference between the two
and maybe some symptoms of each?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
autoimmune disease
is where the body
produces antibodies
against its own cells.
Now conventional medicine
has no idea why that occurs.
And their treatment for
an autoimmune disease
is basically to shut
off the immune system.
Well, that's just not
treating the underlying cause
of the illness.
That's just treating
the symptoms of it.
So in thyroid
autoimmune disease,
the most common ones are
Hashimoto's and Graves'
disease.
And the body is
producing antibodies,
which it's attacking
the thyroid,
and causing inflammation
of the thyroid.
In the case of Graves'
disease, the inflammation
can cause an increased
release of thyroid hormone,
and these people get nervous
and jittery and palpitations.
In the case of
Hashimoto's disease,
certain white blood
cells, called lymphocytes,
attack the thyroid gland,
cause the inflammation.
And you can either get
hyperthyroid-- nervous,
jittery, palpitations--
or you can get hypothyroid,
where they're tired, fatigued,
weight gain.
So it can go either
way with that.
But the underlying cause
of both Hashimoto's
and Graves' disease,
in my research,
has been clearly shown
to be iodine deficiency.
>>EDWARD: So many
people these days, you
ask people what
they suffer from,
and they say fatigue,
chronic fatigue.
What is the correlation between
the thyroid and something
like fibromyalgia,
which would be a pain
disorder, and chronic fatigue?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So recall that
T3 binds to the thyroid hormone
receptors in the cells, and it
increases the metabolic rate.
And it causes the cells
to produce ATP molecules,
or energy molecules.
If we don't have
enough thyroid hormone,
we get depleted of
the metabolic rate,
and everything slows down.
And we get depleted
of ATP molecules.
One of the symptoms of that
is going to be fatigue.
So fatigue should be
a red light going off
in a patient's head
and a doctor's head--
perhaps this is my
thyroid causing this.
Now there can be other
causes of fatigue out there.
It doesn't have to
just be hypothyroidism,
but it's a common cause of it.
So I think that it needs to be
addressed more and looked at.
And in the case of fibromyalgia,
where people are fatigued
and they have muscle
aches and pains,
I've treated many, many
patients over the years.
Once you get their hormonal
system and nutritional system
balanced, many times the
fibromyalgia symptoms
get markedly better.
Or in multiple
cases, they go away.
>>EDWARD: I've talked to many,
many doctors over the years,
and there's a lack of education
when it comes to the thyroid.
There's definitely
a lack of education
when it comes to iodine.
So let's say
somebody is suffering
and they go into the standard
doctor, endocrinologist.
What is the conventional
way to diagnose
and to treat thyroid disorders?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So when I
was in medical school,
I was taught to
check a TSH level.
If that TSH level fell
within the reference range,
then you were to
tell the patient
they don't have a
thyroid problem,
and it was something else.
Now the something else
usually turned into you
were going to write
them a prescription
for an antidepressant
or something like that.
Now medical students are taught
to check a TSH and a T4 level.
And if those levels fall
within the reference range,
they're taught that the patients
don't have a thyroid problem,
and you treat them
with something else.
Now the whole conventional
medical school curriculum
revolves around diagnosing
pathology and prescribing
the one drug to
treat that pathology.
So you've just not
diagnosed a thyroid problem.
You're going to
diagnose something else
and give them another
drug because that's
the whole model
we're trained in.
It's just prescribe drugs.
So if you don't check the
T3 levels, if you don't
check the reverse T3 levels--
there are some other
thyroid levels--
if you don't check the
thyroid antibodies, which
is how a complete holistic
look at thyroid function
should be done, you're
going to miss this stuff.
And I did miss this stuff at
the beginning of my career,
when I was following my
conventional training.
But I am much wiser
about that now.
And I've written
about that in my book
and why it's so important
to check all those thyroid
levels, because otherwise,
you're going to miss
the diagnosis in many patients,
>>EDWARD: How many people do
you think are just misdiagnosed?
I mean, the doctors don't
even look at the thyroid,
or they just diagnose
them with something else
when it's really the thyroid?
>>BROWNSTEIN: It's
a huge amount.
It's sad.
And this is what's making
patients so unhappy out there,
and why they're searching
on the internet for help
for their problems.
And they are being
misdiagnosed, but they're
being underdiagnosed
because doctors
don't know how to properly
test for all the thyroid levels
and how to interpret them.
>>EDWARD: So you talked
about the root cause.
I love that.
What is the root cause
of most of these thyroid
conditions that people
are suffering from today?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, one
of the major root causes
is iodine deficiency.
So as I said,
iodine concentrates
in the thyroid gland.
In fact, the highest
concentration
of iodine in the body
occurs in the thyroid gland.
So this small
little gland weighs
about an ounce,
ounce and a half,
concentrates more iodine than
any other area of the body.
And it's needed to
do that because it
needs to make thyroid
hormone, which is needed
by every cell in the body.
>>EDWARD: By the
way, Dr. Brownstein
does have an incredible book.
It's called "Overcoming
Thyroid Disorders."
It's gone through
several editions.
Dr. Brownstein, this
is an incredible book.
I would recommend everybody
purchase this book.
What's changed in this
book over the years?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
it's interesting.
I only write about what
works in my practice.
So when I see the vast
majority of my people
having thyroid
problems, and when
you correct those thyroid
problems and they get better,
that's why I wrote the book.
What's changed over the years?
Nothing much-- it hasn't
changed that much.
The treatment is still the same.
But what's changed is
we've become more toxic.
So we've become higher--
we've had higher levels of
bromine toxicity and fluoride
toxicity, which is making
more thyroid problems.
And again, as iodine
levels have fallen,
that has exacerbated
the situation.
So the only way to
correct that is following
a holistic plan, where
you correct imbalances,
like take iodine.
You detoxify to help
the body release
these bromide and fluoride
atoms that are in there.
And then you support
the body nutritionally,
with eating a good diet,
drinking enough water,
and correcting
nutrient imbalances.
It's not that difficult
a program to do,
but it does work.
And it works for the
vast majority of patients
that I've seen and my
partners have seen.
>>EDWARD: Over
the last 10 years,
let's say, do you think
that the iodine deficiency
situation is improving at all?
Or do you think it's
still declining?
>>BROWNSTEIN: The good news
about the iodine deficiency
problem is people are learning
about it and taking iodine.
The bad news is our toxicity
levels are still high,
so there's a lot of
problems out there.
But the news is out there,
and people are taking it
into their own hands.
I would tell patients
always to try and work
with a doctor
knowledgeable about iodine,
but those are few
and far between.
So one of the reasons
I write my books
is to educate people
so they can made
good choices on what to do.
>>EDWARD: So why is the RDA of
iodine 150 micrograms a day?
>>BROWNSTEIN: That goes
back almost 100 years
to the early 20th century, when
the population was expanding
across the United States from
the East Coast to the West
Coast.
And in the Midwest--
Michigan, Indiana,
Illinois, Ohio--
there was a goiter epidemic.
And people were suffering
from large thyroids that were
sticking out of their neck.
And it wasn't just
occurring in people.
It was occurring in animals.
The animals were
having thyroid problems
because of a lack of iodine
in the soil and water.
And the animals weren't
growing to the right size,
and they weren't
procreating correctly.
So the government saw this
problem, and the government,
from the highest
levels, were worried
that the expanding human
population across our country
was going to
outstrip the ability
to supply it with enough
food and enough animals
to feed this population,
because the animals
weren't growing correctly.
So the government established
a group to look at this.
And outside of Cleveland,
Ohio, they did the first study
to look at how much iodine
you could add to animal food
to improve the thyroid
function of animals
where they didn't have
a swollen thyroid.
and they grew to the right
size and procreated correctly.
So the minimum
amount of iodine was
found to animal feed that
could make their thyroid
work normally.
And from that, they calculated
the minimum amount of iodine
in humans so they
wouldn't get a goiter.
So the easiest way to
get iodine in humans
at that point was to
put iodine in salt.
So they put 150 micrograms,
which is the RDA for iodine
in salt. And they did a
study in Michigan and Ohio
and found the goiter
went away in those
that took 150 micrograms.
So that's how the
RDA was established,
and it was never
changed from that.
So in conventional
medical thinking,
when the goiter went away,
all the thyroid problems
went away with 150
micrograms of iodine.
So there was really no
need to think about iodine,
to investigate iodine, or to
study iodine at that point.
And from then on,
medical students
were always taught
iodine deficiency
is a thing of the past.
It was rectified
with iodized salt.
That is certainly not the
case, because I diagnose goiter
all the time in patients.
And one of the reasons goiters
aren't being properly diagnosed
is doctors have
lost their skills
at palpating the thyroid.
Doctors have skills
with a pen and a paper,
but they've lost
their hand skills.
And they don't know how to
properly palpate the thyroid.
I was not taught
in medical school
how to properly
palpate a thyroid.
I taught myself my own
technique of doing it.
And when medical
students and residents
rotate with me or I
lecture to doctors,
I take time and show them how
to properly feel a thyroid.
I can feel nodules down
to 0.3 millimeters.
And the way you're taught in
medical school, the only thing
you're going feel
in a thyroid is
if it's sticking out of the
neck, and it's grossly large.
>>EDWARD: So if you
could adjust the RDA,
with all of your
research, what do you
think is a good daily
level of iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So recall, that
has changed over the years.
Our iodine requirements
have gone up
compared to our
predecessors because
of this toxic halide
levels we're exposed to.
So my experience
has shown that it's
going to be milligram amounts of
iodine, not microgram amounts.
So it's going to be 100 to
400 times the RDA for iodine.
Or about 12 to 25
milligrams, for most people,
is going to be the minimal
amount of iodine to allow
the body to release
those toxic halides
and to saturate the iodine
receptors of the body.
>>EDWARD: Do you
think everybody should
go in and get tested for iodine
deficiency on a regular basis?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I
think the best way
to do it is to work with
an iodine-literate doctor.
And do you need to be
tested on a regular basis?
I don't think you need to be
tested on a regular basis.
It's nice to be tested before
therapy and maybe once when
therapy starts.
Then you can use symptoms
and thyroid function
and some other surrogate
markers and adjust the dose
as you need to.
Those who have glandular
problems such as thyroid,
ovaries, uterus, breast,
prostate, pancreas,
will need more iodine
than those that
don't have glandular problems.
So maybe 12 to 25
milligrams, for most people,
can be a healthy amount to
keep bromide and fluoride
from accumulating in the
body, and trying to saturate
the iodine receptors.
But those who have
established glandular problems
will need more iodine.
And sometimes they need
hundreds of milligrams.
And we've seen cancers of
those tissues get better.
Now iodine is not a
standalone therapy.
It's best used as part of a
holistic treatment regimen,
including other hormone
balancing, nutrient balancing,
correcting vitamin and mineral
deficiencies, detoxification,
and a whole host of
other holistic therapies.
>>EDWARD: So if somebody
is watching and says,
I want to go test
my iodine levels,
and goes to their
practitioner and says, Doc,
could you please do
an iodine test on me?
What test are they going to run?
Because I'm assuming that
all these doctors are not
familiar with the iodine
loading test, correct?
>>BROWNSTEIN: That's correct.
So you can do an
iodine spot urine test.
A spot test means you
just pee in a cup,
check the iodine levels,
and see where you're at.
That test only works if
someone's not taking iodine.
Once you're taking iodine,
we have no reference ranges
for that test.
So that leads to the
iodine loading test
that Dr. Abraham designed.
I helped him with it, but
that really was his deal.
And the iodine loading
test is where you
take 50 milligrams of iodine.
From that point, you
collect 24 hours of urine,
and you send in a
little sample of urine.
And we look at how much
iodine comes out in the urine.
And we know 98% to 99%
of orally ingested iodine
will come out in the urine.
So we can simply subtract 50
milligrams minus what came out
and realize how much
your body held on to.
Generally, if the body is
really deficient in iodine,
it'll hold on to a lot
of that 50 milligrams.
If the receptors are all
saturated with iodine,
and you take 50
milligrams, you should
hold on to about 5
milligrams, or 10% of that.
If 5 milligrams is
excreted, you should have
enough iodine in your body.
When you excrete less than
that your body's hanging on to,
you're more deficient.
>>EDWARD: So what do you think
about the blood iodine test?
>>BROWNSTEIN: The blood iodine
test is not a helpful test.
The reference ranges
aren't well set.
It's better to test iodine
through urinary levels.
That's been the established
way for testing iodine
for a number of years.
>>EDWARD: So why are
all the endocrinologists
and why are these
doctors not familiar
with the iodine loading test?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
many doctors aren't
familiar with a lot of things.
They're not familiar with
vitamin C. They're not
familiar with magnesium.
They're not familiar with
other hormones of the body.
Why?
Because they weren't taught
that in medical school,
and they don't know about it.
There's a lot of ignorance
in medicine out there.
And I found out when I
started switching over
to my holistic
practice how little I
did know about medicine.
And I'm still learning
about medicine.
I'm still a student of it.
>>EDWARD: So what would be
the conventional treatment
for someone with hypothyroidism?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, the
conventional treatment
is only instituted when that TSH
falls above a reference range.
And they will use synthetic
thyroid hormone or T4
derivatives.
And it's called
Synthroid or Levothroid.
And they will give
enough T4 thyroid hormone
to drop that TSH back
into the reference range
and call it a day.
Now some people
do fine with that,
but there's more than just
T4, as we went through
on that diagram.
T4 converts into T3.
There's a reverse T3 in there.
So my experience
has clearly shown,
if you're going to use a
thyroid hormone for treating
hypothyroidism, it's much better
when T4 is combined with T3.
There are natural
desiccated thyroid hormones.
Armour Thyroid, Nature-Throid
are examples of those.
You can even use T3
along with T4 separately.
A lot of the
psychiatric literature
shows that improves
depression in people.
So this can be done, but
doctors aren't trained on it.
They don't know about it.
That's why it's best to work
with a holistic practitioner.
>>EDWARD: What about the
opposite, hyperthyroidism,
what's the conventional
method to treat that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
for hyperthyroidism,
they're producing too much
thyroid hormone, too much T4,
too much T3.
The symptoms are nervous,
jittery, palpitations.
People don't like
hyperthyroidism.
They're losing weight
when they're not
trying to lose weight, and
it can make people miserable.
The conventional
treatment for that
is ultimately to use
radioactive iodine therapy,
where you inject
radioactive iodine.
It's taken up by
the thyroid, and it
destroys wherever the cells
that it's taken up to.
The problem with
that therapy is, not
only is radioactive iodine
taken up by the thyroid.
You're forgetting it's
taken up by the breast
and the ovaries and the
prostate and the pancreas
and the uterus.
And not only is it
destroying tissue there,
it's altering the DNA there.
That's why studies show multiple
years after radioactive iodine
therapy for the thyroid,
there is an increased risk
of other cancers.
So radioactive iodine should
be used as a last resort.
In 25 years of looking
at patients this way,
I've not had to use
radioactive iodine in anybody.
I have sent some people
for thyroidectomies.
That's about a patient
every two or three
years, who have Graves' disease,
and we can't get control of it.
And those people are rare.
I would rather people go
through a thyroidectomy
than use radioactive iodine to
get rid of the thyroid gland.
>>EDWARD: Dr.
Brownstein, can you
tell us about one of your
memorable, dramatic thyroid
cases that you saw?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
Tracy's story started
after the birth of
one of her children,
when her doctor picked
up she was hypothyroid
and a TSH in the hundreds.
And she was severely
hypothyroid.
She couldn't think clearly.
She gained about 30
pounds of weight.
Her brain wasn't
working, and she
would mix up the kids' lunches.
She'd go to the grocery
store, couldn't remember why
she was in the grocery store.
She'd be driving home
from the grocery store,
getting lost for
a while, until she
remembered she was going home.
And Tracy's life became
a mess with this,
so her doctor treated
her with Synthroid.
And I show you the
pre picture of Tracy
here with this high TSH.
And the doctor treated
her with Synthroid,
and I'll show you the next
picture of her on Synthroid.
And you can still see
in the second picture,
her face was all
swollen, and she still
was complaining her brain
wasn't working correctly.
She's mixing up
the kids' lunches,
and she's still getting lost,
having the same symptoms.
So she went back
to her doctor here,
and the doctor said, oh,
well, your TSH is normal.
>>EDWARD: That's a
huge difference in TSH.
I mean, what is a
normal TSH level?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
the reference range
for TSH, thyroid
stimulating hormone,
comes from the pituitary
gland to stimulate the thyroid
to make thyroid hormone,
the reference range
for this hormone is about
0.5 to 4.5 in most labs.
Now the optimal TSH level
should be around 1.0,
but we'll talk about
that at the end of this.
So in Tracy's
case, her first TSH
was in the 180s, fell
down to a normal--
in the reference range.
And her doctor said, you don't
have hypothyroidism anymore.
Tracy said, what do I have?
And he goes, I think
you're depressed.
You should be on
an antidepressant.
Tracy said, I'm not
taking an antidepressant.
Something's wrong.
So Tracy had read my
books and came to see me.
And I did an iodine
level on her.
She was very low on iodine.
And I switched her
from the Synthroid
that she was on from
the conventional doctor
to natural thyroid.
And I put her on iodine
at the same time.
And you can see the
following picture of her,
her swelling is gone,
her hair looks better.
And she felt better,
more importantly.
Her brain came back to life.
Tracy became so much
better with things.
She formed a thyroid support
group online and helps
manage thousands of people
who have thyroid problems, who
aren't getting help out there.
>>EDWARD: Dr. Brownstein, let's
talk about thyroid illnesses
in children.
What's going on with that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
it's not just adults
that have thyroid problems.
Kids can have thyroid
problems, and they can have it
for the same reason--
not enough iodine or a
lack of other nutrients
that can cause it.
Or if their mom
has hypothyroidism
when they're pregnant
with the baby,
there's a really
good chance that kid
is going to have hypothyroidism
at some time in their life.
Now let me give an example.
Dawson is one of my patients.
His mom had thyroid cancer,
was given three rounds
of radioactive iodine
treatment before she
was pregnant with him.
And she was not properly
treated with thyroid hormone
and was not properly
normal thyroid when
she was pregnant with Dawson.
So Dawson, in utero, was set
up to have thyroid problems.
So I was treating Dawson's
mom with thyroid hormone,
and she asked me to see Dawson.
The complaints at
that time were Dawson
was up and down, up
and down at mealtime.
He was driving the
family crazy, and he
was disruptive at school.
The teacher said
he was up and down.
He wasn't paying attention.
The school was
bothering Dawson's mom
to put him on Ritalin
and ADHD medications,
and she didn't want to do that.
So when she brought him to me,
I did my history and physical
and checked the lab tests.
And Dawson's thyroid levels
were in the lower part
of the reference range.
He had slow reflexes
when I checked them.
And because of
Dawson's mom's history,
I made a clinical diagnosis
of hypothyroidism with Dawson.
And I put him on a small
amount of thyroid hormone,
and immediately he was better.
The teacher confronted
Dawson's mom
and said, oh, you must've
put him on ADHD medications.
He's so much better.
She said, no, we treated
his hypothyroidism.
So Dawson did well for a time.
And then I get a call from
Dawson's mom a year later
saying, the thyroid
medication isn't working.
He's up and down,
up and down again,
and the school is
complaining again.
What do I do?
So I asked Dawson's mom if
he was in a growth spurt,
and she said yes,
his pants were short.
Now Stephanie, his
mom, had also told
me Dawson had failed a spelling
test which she had worked
with him the night before on.
So I said to her, when
kids are in a growth spurt,
a normal child with
normal thyroid function
will produce more
thyroid hormone
to support the body
during that growth spurt.
Hypothyroid patients
can't do that.
They need an adjustment
on their thyroid hormone.
So over the phone, I
told her, let's all
go up on his natural thyroid
hormone by a quarter grain
and see how he does.
So she called me back
a couple of days later
and said, hey, two days
into this, he was better.
And I'm going to watch
him and see how he does.
And I'm going to make him
take the spelling test again
next week.
So a week later, Dawson went to
take the spelling test again,
and his mom said she
did not prepare him
for the spelling test.
And you can see the results on
the right side of the screen.
He's in the lines.
He's got most of
the words correctly,
no aliens to help him.
And so this is a perfect
example of your brain
on hypothyroidism, on
the left, and your brain
with enough thyroid
hormone on the right.
>>EDWARD: You can see the
lack of attention on the left,
with the aliens up
there, the scribbling.
I mean, his mind is not
being-- he's not being mindful.
His mind is not focusing.
And then a complete
transformation
on the right side,
that is just amazing.
>>BROWNSTEIN: It's not just
kids suffering from this.
It's adults too.
And that's why doctors are busy
prescribing antidepressants
and psychiatric
medications and stimulants
to both adults and
kids, when they're not
treating the underlying
cause of these problems.
These kids and adults don't
have a stimulant deficiency
syndrome.
They have hormonal imbalances.
They have nutrient imbalances.
They have toxicities that
need to be addressed.
>>EDWARD: And this
transformation
happened in just 11 days.
That is incredible.
Now if somebody out
there is looking
for supplementing with
iodine, the iodine
that you use in your
practice, can you
give us a general overview
of the different types
of iodine supplementations,
what they can take,
what you recommend.
Obviously, you don't want
people going to the drugstore
and getting povidone iodine
from the shelf and drinking it,
right?
>>BROWNSTEIN: First,
I would say it's
best if you can work with
a holistic doctor who can
help monitor you and guide you.
And that's what I
would recommend.
If you're going to
use iodine, it's
better to use a combination
of iodine and iodide,
not use one form alone.
I can tell you from
personal experience
that the combination
works better.
And it's important
to keep in mind
that small amounts of iodine
which in previous generations
could help people,
in this generation
were too toxic and too loaded
with bromide and fluoride.
It's not enough iodine
to help the body kick out
those toxic things.
So I think we need
to use milligram
amounts of these things.
Average doses for
most of my patients
are around 25 milligrams a day.
If they have glandular
problems or cancer
or serious other
problems, I'll use more.
And it's a pretty
safe therapy for most.
There are potential side
effects with iodine,
like for any therapy out there.
But it's a pretty safe
therapy out there.
>>EDWARD: Why do you think that
conventional doctors and even
some natural health
care practitioners out
there have that fear
of using iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, conventional
doctors don't know about it.
So they weren't taught it.
They don't know about it.
They don't want to use it.
As far as the holistic
practitioners,
the myth that iodine causes
Hashimoto's and Graves' disease
should be dispelled by
what I said earlier,
that iodine levels have fallen.
At the same time, Graves' and
Hashimoto's has increased.
I don't-- I can't quite
explain it to you,
how when you're
presented with the data,
that you can't see
the light there.
But some people just don't want
to allow themselves to see it.
I can tell you, in our
practice of treating thousands
of patients, we
help people get over
Hashimoto's and Graves' disease.
And you can do it with a
natural, holistic approach.
>>EDWARD: So what would be your
recommendation for somebody
who wants to go find a
holistic practitioner?
What do they do, the
questions they ask?
How do they find
somebody that knows
about iodine, that
knows about how
to treat the thyroid properly?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So number one,
they can look on the internet
and try and find people.
Number two, they can call
a compounding pharmacist
in their area.
The compounding
pharmacists know who
is prescribing natural
things for their patients.
And number three, they're going
to look at holistic societies.
I'm on the board of the
International College
of Integrative Medicine.
It's ICIMED.org.
And they have a list of
doctors around the country.
There are other groups
who do this as well.
It may be hard work
to find somebody.
It may be a little
laborious, but in the end,
it can be worth it if
you can find a partner
to work with you to maintain
your optimal health.
>>EDWARD: Yes, totally.
Do you think that those
individuals should recommend
to their health
care practitioners
to do the iodine loading test?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I
have no problem when
patients recommend to me to do
certain testing or therapies.
So I don't think
that other doctors
should have a problem either.
And I think people
should educate themselves
and should be a part of
their health care decision.
So sure, I think they can have
a discussion with their health
care provider about that.
>>EDWARD: When
individuals start,
when you put
individuals on iodine,
do they ever go through some
sort of a Herxheimer reaction
or some sort of
a detoxification?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So iodine
can cause the body
to release fluoride and bromide.
So if you have a lot
of that in your body,
you can get sick from that.
And I've seen patients
get sick from that.
That's the Herxheimer
reaction you're talking about.
And they can get achy
and flu-like and fatigued
from that.
Now to minimize that,
it's important to use salt
with the iodine.
>>EDWARD: What do
you think is going
to happen in the next 10
years with thyroid and iodine
deficiency?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I think
as the laypeople
become more informed and more
interested in their health
and take more of
an effort and push
this more, that's
what's going to push
the wheel the other way.
I do think things
will turn, but I
don't think it's going to
turn from the medical side.
I think it's going to turn from
the patient side, which will
force the medical side to turn.
>>EDWARD: What is the number
one thing you want our viewers
to take away from this episode?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I want to tell
the viewers that you don't have
to suffer with chronic illness.
If you're unhappy with
your medical care,
if you're taking drugs
that aren't helping you,
that you think are making
you sicker, let's search
for a better alternative.
And you can take
control of your health,
and you can learn
about the things
that you need to
do from my books,
from other people that
have written books.
And it's up to you to take
charge of your health care
and make the right decisions.
>>EDWARD: People can read
the book "Overcoming Thyroid
Disorders," which gives you a
general overview of the things
you need to know on how you
can become healthy again,
how you can adjust your
thyroid, how to recognize
some of the symptoms.
Where can people get additional
information about you?
How can they keep up
with this growing trend?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So I've
written 15 books.
They're all available on my
website, wwww.drbrownstein.com,
and I only write
about what works.
And if it works
in my practice, it
should work everywhere
else too, because that's
what's working in my
practice right now.
>>EDWARD: Dr.
Brownstein, thank you
so much for coming on today.
Thank you for being on
"The Healing Matrix."
We really appreciate all
of your years of research
and dedication to
helping so many people
around the world who suffer
from thyroid disorders.
Thank you.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Thank you.
>>EDWARD: As you've seen,
the proper functioning
of the thyroid gland
is of utmost importance
to our health.
Unfortunately, there are very
few in the medical profession
today who truly
understand or are
willing to speak out on the real
causes of thyroid dysfunction.
Thankfully, Dr. David Brownstein
has zeroed in on the key role
that iodine deficiency
plays in thyroid disease.
We hope you've taken
away from this program
that you don't need to suffer
with the symptoms of thyroid
disease.
With this new understanding
of thyroid disorders,
you too can get the
help you need to live
your most vital, healthy life.
Be sure to watch
our next episode
with Dr. Brownstein on
iodine and glandular cancers.
I'm Dr. Ed Group.
Thank you for joining us on
this special edition of "Healing
Matrix."
[MUSIC PLAYING]